# -*- mode:org -*-
- [ ] intro.tex
- [ ] method.tex
- [ ] concl.tex
- [ ] results.tex

http://gow.epsrc.ac.uk/NGBOViewGrant.aspx?GrantRef=EP/I004262/1
Flows of complex fluids (such as polymers, colloids, emulsions, pastes
etc.) are abundant in everyday life. One can think of pouring syrup
from a bottle or squeezing toothpaste from a tube, but also of
fibre-spinning and extrusion - processes used to produce plastic bags,
optical fibres, wire coatings, guitar strings etc. Complex fluids, and
polymer solutions in particular, often exhibit unexpected behaviour -
they do not flow like water. For example, if one rotates a spoon in a
cup of tea, the tea is pushed towards the walls of the cup. When,
instead, this experiment is repeated with a polymeric liquid, the
polymers move towards the spoon producing the so-called rod-climbing
effect.What is even more surprising is that flows of polymers can
become unstable. One of the famous examples is the melt-fracture
phenomenon observed in extrusion of concentrated polymer solutions or
melts, which is one of the main elements of polymer processing in
industry. There the liquid is pressed through a thin capillary to
produce a regular jet of polymers. At low extrusion speeds the jet
remains straight and homogeneous, while at larger speeds the flow
starts undulating, becomes chaotic and eventually breaks up. These
instabilities are one of the main production-limiting factors and have
been plaguing technology and industry for years. Their presence is
surprising since in Newtonian flows, instabilities and the transition
to turbulence are inertia-driven, and are expected to occur when the
Reynolds number exceeds some critical value. The Reynolds number
characterises the ratio of inertial to viscous effects and is
inversely proportional to the fluid viscosity. For extremely viscous
polymeric fluids typical Reynolds numbers are very small, far below
the critical value. The inertia-driven transition is thus absent and
can not explain instabilities in polymeric solutions. Instead, some
other mechanism causes destabilisation.The striking properties of
polymer solutions and melts arise from the interactions between their
microstructure and the flow: long polymer molecules are stretched and
oriented by the flow. In the past 20 years, we have begun to
understand that flow-induced stretching and orientation of polymers
can not only make polymers flow differently than water, but can also
destabilise the flow, leading to vortices and random flows. This
chaotic motion looks similar to Newtonian turbulence but is not
inertial in origin. This new type of turbulence, the so-called elastic
turbulence, is poorly understood and little is known about its
structure and conditions at which it might appear.The aim of this
research programme is to study this new type of turbulence by means of
computer simulations and semi-analytical methods recently developed to
describe the structure of Newtonian turbulence close to the
transition. The motivation to perform this study is three-fold. First,
this is a completely new type of turbulence which we have not
encountered in Newtonian fluids like water. Since many every-day
fluids are non-Newtonian and viscoelastic, it might be that
understanding elastic turbulence is even more important than
understanding Newtonian one. Secondly, understanding the origin of
elastic turbulence might provide a solution to the industrial problems
like melt-fracture. Finally, by comparing the two, we may learn
something about the mechanism of Newtonian turbulence.
